[Music]
for error intelligence
the dawning of world war in 1939 found
the United States rather unprepared in
another area of intelligence operations
a relatively new field but nevertheless
a function which Japan and the principal
European powers and greatly refined at
that time air intelligence had been
inaugurated in the American armed forces
at the outbreak of the Civil War with
balloonists or aeronauts serving both
with the field armies and with the
Signal Corps footnote generally C F
Stansbury Hayden Aeronautics and the
Union and Confederate armies Baltimore
the John Hopkins University Press 1941
and footnote the loosely organized
balloon core of the Union forces
disbanded in June 1863 did not exceed
seven balloons and nine trained
aeronauts during its period of operation
footnote US Air Force Department air
university research studies institute
development of intelligence function in
the USAF 1917 through 1950 by Victor H
Cohen typescript January 1st 1957
chapter 1 page 16 copies of this study
bear the marking secret the copy
utilized in this study was Declassified
and supplied by the office of the
Secretary of Defense and footnote its
mission
Observation the most rudimentary
intelligence tasks during the
spanish-american war the Signal Corps
dispatched it's only available balloon
and to aeronauts to Cuba where they
apparently saw to brief but effective
days of service in the attack on San
Juan Hill
although a second balloon unit was
organized at Tampa Florida to accompany
a new Expeditionary Force to Puerto Rico
the armistice rendered their departure
unnecessary almost four years after the
Wright brothers successfully
demonstrated the ability of a machine
powered heavier-than-air apparatus to
carry man aloft the chief signal officer
of the Army Brigadier General James
Allen established on August 1st 1907 an
aeronautical division in his office two
years and one day later after a number
of trial tests approval was granted for
the purchase of the first army flying
machine from the Wrights quote by the
time of the long-delayed recognition of
the Wright brothers in 1909 the Army's
interest in aviation had been primarily
for the purpose of improving
reconnaissance the first heavier than
air craft as well as lighter than air
craft was evaluated by the military
solely in terms of collecting
information it took only a few years of
army experimentation with airplanes
to conclude that there is a greater
development potential for military
reconnaissance in the airplane than in
captive or dirigible balloons
therefore practically all available
funds for Aeronautics in the Signal
Corps beginning with fiscal year 1912
were devoted to the purchase and
maintenance of heavier-than-air craft
this was a bold decision because limited
airplane performances by that time had
not demonstrated any military value
other than that the army could extend
its range of vision airplanes were
valued for their relatively passive role
of spying out the enemy's disposition
and not as actively aggressive weapons
in themselves despite experiments made
in shooting machine guns taking pictures
and dropping explosives from
the Signal Corps decided to adopt two
types of airplanes and both for
reconnaissance missions the Scout was
desired for service with ground troops
for carrying two pilots and radio and
photographic equipment and for traveling
at least 45 miles per hour for four
hours the speed scout was designed to
carry only one pilot at a minimum speed
of 65 miles for three hours end quote
in 1913 the House military affairs
committee explored the possibility of
creating an air unit apart from the
Signal Corps but found little favor for
the idea
footnote C US Congress House Committee
on Military Affairs Aeronautics in the
army hearings 63rd Congress first
session Washington US Government
Printing Office 1913 in footnote 3 years
later Army airmen were afforded their
first opportunity to operate under
combat conditions when the first aero
squadron was deployed in support of
brigadier John J Pershing's Mexican
border campaign while the number of
missions were successfully completed
quote the most significant lesson which
was brought forcibly to the attention of
the government and the people especially
in the face of the rapid development of
aviation during the European war was the
need for increasing and properly
equipping an air force to accomplish the
missions assigned to it consequently
Congress appropriated 500,000 dollars
and over 13 million dollars in March and
August of 1916 to expand the aviation
section of the Signal Corps which had
been established in 1914 the total of
these sums was 13 times greater than all
the money that hitherto had been
appropriated for army aviation purposes
end quote as generous
these appropriations were they proved
insufficient to significantly improve
the air core for immediate participation
in hostilities when the United States
entered World War one the following year
quote the United States entered World
War one without a single pursuit or
combat type airplane hardly a single
flying officer was adequately familiar
with aircraft machineguns bombing
devices aerial photography or other
aviation instruments well-known - the
Aviators of England in all respects the
nation was several years behind European
aviation development in fact the
director of military aeronautics
reported that in contrast to European
developments the United States at the
time of its entry into the war stood
very little ahead of where it had been
before the world war broke out if the
United States had a doctrine for aerial
employment it's centered on the use of
the few aircraft for the support of
ground forces as observation and courier
vehicles at the time of America's
declaration of war
the aviation section consisted of 65
officers - flying fields with 224
airplanes mostly training types nearly
all obsolete and type when compared with
the machines then an effective service
in France in addition there was little
combat experience or knowledge of
European war lessons upon which to base
an adequate statement of aerial mission
and a plan for aerial production to
implement that mission for a long period
European nations guarded certain things
especially about airplanes from American
observers unfortunately actual American
participation in war was necessary
before the concept of aviation as a
flexible and mobile instrument of war
and not merely as an intelligence
collecting agent could be given a
preliminary trial and quote once the
declaration of war had been made efforts
got underway to organise air
intelligence activities quote prior to
America's entry into World War one
military aviation was considered nothing
more than an information collecting
service performed by lighter and heavier
than aircraft for the use of individual
ground commanders adequate intelligence
organizations for the systematic
collection collation evaluation and
dissemination of information to all
commanders concerned did not exist
it was the prevailing concept that troop
commanders in combat should use their
own available means and resources for
securing information about the enemy
higher commanders would get what they
needed by means of their own agencies or
by direct request to commanders in
contact with the enemy end quote
at no time during the war did the
Military Intelligence Division in
Washington have a subsection responsible
for air intelligence matters such was
not the case in France quote under the
general theory of intelligence
prevailing among the associated powers
intelligence units in the AEF American
Expeditionary Force were established in
all organizations beginning with the
battalion and each Esalen was
responsible for intelligence on its own
front end quote
quote the task of obtaining assembling
weighing and distributing information on
all phases of the enemy's aviation
including its organization materiel
personnel operations and the location of
its units was the responsibility of the
office of air intelligence g2 a7 the AEF
military information divisions 7th
subsection which had been organized in
march 1918 by Lieutenant Prentiss M
Terry who is later succeeded by Maj C F
Thompson as officers in charge of the
air intelligence subdivision they were
responsible for furnishing the general
staff on GHQ the staff of Army's and
Corps and the air service with
intelligence concerning the enemy Air
Arm the first three months of g2 a7s
existence were consumed in organizing
the work of the office in collecting
intelligence information from French and
British intelligence offices and in
visiting Air Service headquarters for
the purpose of determining how best it
could be served
end quote the subsection ultimately
established five units for performing
its duties an interrogation of prisoners
section staffed by one officer the air
order of battle section responsible for
tracking the size organization markings
location duties equipment and personnel
of enemy air units a bomb targets
section a technical section responsible
for assembling and disseminating
information on the production
performance and maintenance of enemy
aircraft and an enemy air activity
section responsible for collecting
assembling and disseminating
intelligence on enemy air strategy and
tactics enemy aviation training and the
effects of Allied air operations quote
in view of the limited air operations
during World War one the list of air
Intelligence functions to be performed
by approximately seven officers and
sixteen enlisted men in g2s
office of air intelligence sounded more
imposing than they actually were before
the office could gain much experience in
the new branch of military intelligence
dealing with air matters the war ground
to a halt nevertheless g2a 7 was
destined to become a prototype of the
air intelligence organization of the
next world war end quote
liaison between the AEF MI d our
intelligence subsection and units of the
air service was conducted by branch
intelligence officers who were under the
supervision of g2 a7 and had staffs
consisting of a clerk to draftsman and
an orderly sent to air groups and
squadrons by the office of air
intelligence the branch intelligence
officers did not merely confine
themselves to obtaining intelligence
information about the enemy Air Arm they
in fact acted as the intelligence
officers of the air unit to which they
were assigned quote but the control over
intelligence operations and air units by
b.i OS who were detached officers from
the military intelligence division of
the GHQ AEF
objectionable to the air service and its
predecessor organization which had been
headed by Lieutenant Colonel William
Mitchell aeronautical officer AEF the
work of air intelligence was believed to
belong properly to the Air Service and
that such intelligence would be made
available to g2 at headquarters a EF
their channels and liaison activities
the thesis of the supporters of this
idea was that air intelligence officers
required a technical knowledge of
aviation for the proper performance of
their duty if possible intelligence
officers should be qualified aerial
observers so that they could better
appreciate the problems of observation
and be better able to interrogate
observers returning from intelligence
gathering missions it was impossible
they said to get good results from a
system which gave prominent place to
intelligence officers detailed to the
air service as representatives of g2 but
not responsible to the air service if
squadron intelligence officers were
integral parts of the air squadrons they
could be selected from among candidates
for pilots and observers and they could
be partially trained during the
squadrons organization and training
period during that time the air
intelligence officer would be able to
build up comradeship and a sense of
responsibility which could not be
expected from a general staff
representative who did not join a unit
until it was at the front and as much as
Corps and army aviation commanders were
responsible for the actual collection of
air intelligence by means of visual and
photographic reconnaissance they should
be better able to exercise closer
supervision over the collection and
dissemination of air intelligence by
lower units than any branch intelligence
officer moreover adherence to the
doctrine of Air Force control over air
intelligence believed that such control
would make the Air Service more
independent and freer
in its effort to be progressive and
efficient end quote
because of this sentiment the Flying
Corps sought some vehicle to serve its
needs regarding intelligence production
and placed it's trust for this function
in the information section quote the
information section of the air service
could be considered a quasi air
intelligence organization which
duplicated g2a 7 operations for the
avowed purpose of disseminating air
intelligence and information more
quickly and widely throughout the earth
service ISAs had its origin in general
order 21 headquarters a EF 13th of
August 1917 which directed departments
and Corps including the air service to
designate an officer specifically
charged with the collection and
dissemination of military information
relating to his organization early in
September an information department was
inaugurated in the air service it was
charged with the collection preparation
and distribution of all information of
special interest to the air service
liaison with the intelligence section
General Staff AEF and the organization
and supervision of Air information
officers attached to air service units
little information of the personnel and
records of that department are available
evidently it passed through different
commands until February 1918 at which
time its duties were absorbed by the
Intelligence Division of the training
section Air Service AEF end quote the
training sections Intelligence Unit have
been inaugurated in Paris in December
1917 a month later efforts were being
made by the section chief captain Ernest
L Jones to expand his unit from training
responsibilities to Central Intelligence
operations for the entire Air Service on
March 28th 1918 the Intelligence
Division was given its mandate to serve
the intelligence needs of the entire air
Court and was renamed information
section Air Service quote by the end of
the war the ISAs had grown into six
subdiv
statistics library general information
editorial and research production and
history its personnel had increased from
an original staff of two officers and
one enlisted man to ten officers thirty
enlisted men and three civilians end
quote
quote the trials and tribulations of the
ISAs and finding its place in a new
service under wartime conditions were
essentially repeated by its comparable
organization in America the genesis of
the first intelligence office in the
Army Air Arm appears to be early in
March 1917 when Lieutenant Colonel John
B Bennett officer in charge of the
aeronautical division of the Signal
Corps recommended on the basis of a
General Staff memorandum that his
division be expanded in functions and
personnel his plans included the
establishment of an air Intelligence
Unit the reorganization of the
aeronautical division approved on 16th
of March by General George o Squire
chief signal officer provided for an air
Intelligence office under the personnel
subdivision which was redesignated
correspondence subdivision shortly after
the United States declared war the
functions of the small intelligence
office headed by captain Edgar s goral
were to collect codify and disseminate
aeronautical information end quote
a few months later in June the unit was
renamed the airplane division and a
reorganization placed the intelligence
section on a par with the other three
new major subdivisions for training
equipment and organization placed in
charge of the new intelligence unit was
major Henry H HAP Arnold destined to
become world war ii chief of staff for
air assisted by ernest L Jones longtime
owner editor and publisher of
Aeronautics magazine quote the duties of
the intelligence section at this time
consisted largely of collecting and
filling military aeronautical data of
every nature and from
all sources and making digests of
pertinent information for interested
officials intelligence material from
military anti Shay's and other
representatives abroad had been flowing
into the OCS oh since the early days of
aeronautics in the Signal Corps but
after the United States entered the war
the British French and Italian
governments released information of
greater value and volume the pressures
of war caused further expansion and
changes in the airplane division on 1st
of October the air division succeeded
the airplane division Brigadier General
Benjamin D fillet continued as chief
with Colonel Arnold as executive in
charge of the 15 sections constituting
the entire air division of the Signal
Corps the intelligence section was
redesignated the information section and
captain Harold C candy succeeded
lieutenant Jones as officer in charge
the latter was soon promoted to captain
and ordered overseas to continue similar
work in the AEF training section
Intelligence Division end quote although
further organizational alterations
occurred there was little variation in
the information sections functions until
President Wilson by an executive order
of May 20th 1918 designated the division
of military aeronautics which had been
created within the Signal Corps during
the previous month quote an independent
agency with the duty of performing every
aviation function heretofore discharged
by the Signal Corps except those
pertaining to the production of aircraft
and aircraft equipment the newly
established and independent bureau of
aircraft production VAP created on 24th
of April 1918 was given complete control
over the production of airplanes
airplane engines and aircraft equipment
for the use of the army in August mr.
John D Ryan then second Assistant
Secretary of War was appointed director
of air service in charge of both the BA
P and D MA
as a result of these reorganizations the
information section on 21st of May
became the intelligence branch of the
executive section of the DMA about two
months later he was redesignated the
aeronautical information branch which by
the end of August had been organized
into seven sub branches procurement
confidential information publicity and
sensorial statistics clerical detail
auxilary and headquarters bulletin
throughout the war the functions of the
air intelligence or information sections
in the Signal Corps and their successor
the aeronautical information branch of
the DMA primarily consisted of the
collection and dissemination of
information pertaining to domestic and
foreign aviation activities including
those of the enemy the maintenance of a
library and complete files properly
cross-indexed of all information and
statistics on hand the continuance of a
liaison system with the AEF foreign
governments and other US government
departments and the censoring of
articles and photographs for publication
submitted through the Committee on
Public Information the American
information unit exchanged bulletins and
other material with its counterpart in
the AEF the information section of the
air service the general information and
technical bulletins published on both
sides of the ocean pertained to every
phase of aviation indeed the Washington
Air Information Office like it's
analogous section overseas was a quasi
intelligence organization concerned in
part with knowledge about the enemy and
quote one other wartime structure is of
interest at this juncture the research
information committee quote the RIC
with branch committees in Paris and
London have been organized in the early
part of 1918 by the joint action of the
secretaries of war and Navy and with the
approval of the Council of national
defense in cooperation with the offices
of military and naval intelligence the
RIC was to secure classify and
disseminate scientific
technical and industrial research
information especially relating to war
problems between the United States and
its allies by this plan the government
endeavoured to establish a central
clearing exchange information service by
means of which the Army General Staff
the various bureaus of the Army and Navy
the Committees of the Council of
National Defense and the scientific
organizations in the United States
working on war production and inventions
could be kept posted on technical and
scientific developments at home and
abroad the RIC and Washington consisted
of a civilian member representing the
National Research Council a Technical
Assistant the chief of the military
intelligence section Mis and the
director of Naval Intelligence as a
result of its membership on the RIC
the military intelligence section was
made responsible for securing and
disseminating scientific and technical
research information for all branches of
the army the MIS was assisted in its
duties by the liaison representatives to
the RIC from the dma b.a.p and other
military bureaus in certain instances
when information could only be obtained
by sending experts to Europe the
individuals so designated were supposed
to clear through the RIC
which would check to see if the
information was available in this
country or if the research was necessary
those cleared for travel were instructed
to contact the RI C's Paris or London
committee through which any information
collected would be dispatched to the RIC
in Washington this was to be done even
though different communication channels
were employed at the same time by those
sent abroad the overseas committees each
consisted of the military naval and
scientific anti-phase and a technical
assistant in addition to serving as the
clearinghouse for information flowing
from both sides of the Atlantic those
committees were designated to serve the
commander-in-chief of the military and
naval forces in Europe and to cooperate
and render assistance to the offices of
the military and naval anti-phase in the
collection analysis
dissemination of scientific and
industrial research information end
quote
with the end of World War one came the
exhaustive task of reorganizing the air
service for peacetime operations in
January 1919 the director of the air
service was made more directly
responsible for the supervision and
direction of the division of military
aeronautics and the Bureau of aircraft
production by mid-march it was decided
that the air service would adopt the
structure of its AEF operation in France
thereby causing it to gain direct
control over both diem a and B AP quote
the information group in the AU das was
designated to receive its intelligence
information primarily through the
military intelligence division of the WD
GS War Department General Staff and from
foreign missions information on military
and commercial Aeronautics in the United
States came from information officers at
military posts and from liaison officers
with other governmental and civilian air
activities a special division was added
to the information group toward the
latter part of 1919 for the purpose of
collecting and disseminating
meteorological information and for
handling such special activities as
publicity and correspondents relative to
congressmen and municipal landing fields
for airplanes
end quote the army reorganization Act of
1920 had little impact upon the
intelligence structure of the military
organization the air service became a
coordinate combat branch of the line and
the division of military aeronautics was
formally abolished quote the director of
air service was henceforth known as the
chief of Air Service CAS similar to the
title of chief held by the other heads
of the combatant arms of the army end
quote
on may 29 1919 the research information
committee renamed the research
information service was reorganized for
peacetime operations under the National
Research Council quote it was not until
shortly after
major-general Maison M Patrick succeeded
general Ct Manohar as CAS on 5th of
October 1921 that another reorganization
of the Air Service was adopted the new
structure was patterned after general
Pershing's 1921 reorganization of the
War Department General Staff WD GS into
the following 5 divisions personnel g1
military intelligence g2 operations and
training g3 supply g4 and war plans it
was natural that the WD GS be organized
along the lines of Pershing's a EF
General Patrick's reorganization of 1st
of December 1921 abolished the groups
and created the personnel information
training and war plans supply and
engineering divisions it was not
surprising that General Patrick who had
been Pershing's chief of Air Service AEF
should follow the organizational model
of his war and peacetime commander the
new information division was assigned a
more practical mission than its
predecessor the information group
instead of trying to collect every kind
of information on aeronautics the
primary function of the information
division was the collection of essential
aeronautical information from all
possible sources greater concern was
shown for the collection of information
of an intelligence nature by the
requirement that one of the three
general classes of information should be
concerned with the quote uses of
aircraft and war including the
organization of the air forces of the
world
tactical doctrines types of aircraft
used organization of the personnel
operating and maintaining aircraft end
quote the other two classes of
information dealt with technical matters
and information relative to other phases
of military aviation because of reduced
military appropriations and the lack of
personnel collection and dissemination
divisions were abolished during the
reorganization and their duties were
assumed by the librarian reproduce
in sections respectively end quote in
1925 the information division created a
military intelligence section which
worked in liaison with the collections
section of the Military Intelligence
Division of the General Staff this M ID
unit mi5 administered the military anti
che system maintained official contact
with state commerce and other executive
departments involved with foreign
matters and functioned as adviser to the
foreign liaison officer on questions
concerning the distribution of
aeronautical information to foreign
countries however very little could be
accomplished by the understaffed unit
with the passage of the Air Corps Act on
July 2nd 1926 quote the information
division remained on the coordinating
staff level of the newly designated
office of the chief of the Air Corps
OCAC as the counterpart to the Military
Intelligence Division of the WGS and
quote quote in placing the Air Corps Act
into effect the organizational changes
made in December 1926 among other things
divided the information division of the
OCAC into four sections and renamed them
to indicate their major functions the
air intelligence section became the
successor to the mid-40s on with the M I
do want the new section was also charged
with the procurement evaluation and
dissemination of foreign and domestic
aeronautical information and with the
maintenance and supervision of the Air
Corps Library the photographic section
was made responsible for collecting
filing and distributing all photographs
taken by the Air Corps a voluminous file
of negatives of scientific historical
and news value was maintained the
publications section received the duties
of printing reproducing and distributing
all publications and documents such as
information circulars airport bulletins
air navigation maps etc
the press relations section replacing
the special section was charged with the
preparation and release of all news
items and with aircore publicity matters
end quote
these efforts at reorganization however
did not necessarily result in a better
air intelligence capability quote
functionally the information division in
the early part of the 30s had reached a
new low the plan's division OCAC took
over part of the information divisions
functionings of collecting evaluating
and disseminating intelligence
information because of the latter's
failure to send out copies of important
reports to the tactical school and to
various Air Corps instructors and
individuals when Lieutenant Colonel
Walter R Weaver became chief of the
information division in June of 1933 his
first moves were to protest vigorously
against this usurpation of functions and
to strengthen his organization his
actions were backed by the chief of the
Air Corps who then confirmed the
information divisions responsibilities
for one the collection and dissemination
of air intelligence information
concerning foreign countries to the
compilation and distribution of
information on military aviation and
three the coordination of matters of
interest between the Air Corps and the
State Department and the military
intelligence division of the WD GS under
Colonel Weaver's guidance the
information division increased its
effectiveness and by mid 1934 it had
added a number of additional duties
including the collection of comparative
data on plane and personnel strengths
air budgets and general organization of
the air arms of England France Italy
Japan and the United States this
function was assumed by the intelligence
section which for many years was staffed
by one officer and from two to five
civilian employees nevertheless the
section during fiscal year 1935 not only
made comparative studies of national air
forces but it also was able
to initiate a digest of foreign aviation
information the evaluation and
distribution of such air intelligence
the chief of the Air Corps said later
quote has been of vital importance and
interest owing to the increased aviation
activities abroad the volume of this
particular type of work within the
intelligence section has materially
increased end quote recalling his
thoughts on the eve of war in Europe
general HAP Arnold appointed chief of
Air Corps on September 29 1938 wrote
quote looking back on it I think one of
the most wasteful weaknesses in our
whole set up was our lack of a proper
air intelligence organization it is
silly in the light of what we came to
know that I should still have been so
impressed by the information given me in
Alaska by that casual German who called
my hotel and told me about their new
bomber I know now that there were
American journalists and ordinary
travelers in Germany who knew more about
the Luftwaffe sprepper ations than I
then the assistant chief of the United
States Army Corps from Spain where our
army observers watched the actual air
fighting reports were not only weak but
unimaginative
nobody gave us much useful information
about Hitler's air force until Lindbergh
came home in 1939 our target
intelligence the ultimate determinate
the compass on which all the priorities
of our strategic bombardment campaign
against Germany would depend was set up
only after we were actually at war part
of this was our own fault part was due
to the lack of cooperation from the War
Department general staffs she too part
to a change in the original conception
of the b-17 as a defensive weapon to a
conception of it as a weapon of offense
against enemy industries end quote and
what had Arnold learned from The Lone
Eagle which neither military nor air
intelligence could supply quote
Lindbergh gave me the most accurate
picture of the Luftwaffe its equipment
leaders
plans training methods and present
defects that I had so far received chief
of the German Air Force's shortcomings
at that time seemed to be its lack of
sufficient trained personnel to man the
equipment already on hand a fact which
might make unlikely powerful sustained
operations through 1940 gring's
neglect of strategic bombardment and
logistics was not yet apparent on the
contrary German industrial preparations
were enormous and bombers would arrange
for strategic attacks almost anywhere in
Europe made up a large part of his force
though these same do 17 s and H e1 11s
could also be employed for direct
support of ground troops Lindbergh felt
that Hitler held the destruction of any
major city on the continent or in
Britain in his hands end quote
footnote Leonard Mosley how the Nazis
used Lindberg New York v 9 March 3rd
1976 32 through 38 end footnote Arnold
had been made aware of the deficiencies
of air intelligence operations from
other quarters including the chief of
his plans section lieutenant colonel
karl spots as war plans were developed
by the War Department and the strategic
employment of air power applied accurate
air intelligence became essential for
the execution of those plans but as
spots informed Arnold in August of 1939
such intelligence data was not being
maintained ready for issue in the office
of the Air Corps or elsewhere quote as a
result of sponses council an Air Corps
board was convened a week before
Hitler's attack on Poland to determine
the nature scope and form of
intelligence required for aerial
operations also the board was to make
recommendations as to the methods and
procedures for obtaining and processing
that intelligence after meeting daily
for several days the board composed of
intelligence representatives from the
CAC a CTS and GHQ af made what was
doubtless the most comprehensive
analysis for air intelligence
requirements to that time the
intelligence needed by the Air Corps the
board stated fell into three categories
a that required by the sea a sea for
strategic planning in connection with
the preparation or revision of joint
basic war plans and the employment of
air power in any theatre the that
required for technical planning to
ensure American leadership both in the
production of planes and equipment and
in the development of adequate tactics
and techniques for aerial operations see
that required for tactical planning and
execution of plans the board recognized
g2s responsibility for collecting and
processing all intelligence information
except for the processing required for
War Department estimates however the
board believed the air core to be better
qualified to handle intelligence
information on certain phases of foreign
aviation accordingly the board
recommended that the Air Corps should
continue its current task of preparing
air technical intelligence and should
assume the responsibility for processing
information pertaining to tactical
operations and to the use of aircraft
and anti-aircraft defense for strategic
intelligence required by the Air Corps
g2 was considered to be in a better
position not only to prepare economic
political and combat estimates but also
to determine the vulnerability of
potential ere objectives and systems of
objectives together with an estimate of
the probable effect of the destruction
thereof the board also suggested that
general Arnold as chief of the Air Corps
and principal advisor on air matters to
the chief of staff WD GS be allowed to
establish in his office an air
Intelligence Agency considerably larger
than the existing information divisions
intelligence section end quote
never submitted for or otherwise given
Ward apart
and approval this report marked the
beginning of a controversy continuing
into the time of United States entry
into the war between the Military
Intelligence Division War Department and
the air cores intelligence organization
over air intelligence activities and
responsibilities when the information
division OCAC
started collecting intelligence
information outside of g2 channels the
MiG directed that this activities cease
and that requests for such data be
routed through the Military Intelligence
Division this action occurred in the
autumn of 1939 relenting somewhat in May
of the following year g2 permitted the
air cores Information division to make
direct contacts for intelligence
information with all federal agencies
except the Navy and State Department
quote the war departments g2 had been
cognizant for some time of the
incompetency of the personnel in his
intelligence branch to maintain digests
of aviation information moreover as the
branch was organized on a geographic
basis with each geographic section being
responsible for all phases of
intelligence for the countries assigned
it became obvious that a separate unit
was needed to evaluate and interpret the
voluminous amount of air intelligence
being received
shortly after Hitler's attack on Poland
a separate error section was established
in the intelligence branch of the
mid-40s and telogen s-- activities of
maintaining a current summary of air
operations and of supervising the
preparation of air intelligence the air
section apparently was not formally
established until March 1940 when major
Ennis C Whitehead who was chief of the
southern European section of the
intelligence branch and the only Air
Corps officer on duty with g2 was named
chief of the new air section for the
first four months he was assisted only
by Lieutenant Marvin L Harding in July
mrs. Irma G Robinson was transferred to
the air section from the air cores
intelligence office
when Whitehead who had been promoted to
lieutenant colonel was replaced by
Lieutenant Colonel Jack C Hodgson in the
late summer of 1941 the total personnel
in the air section consisted of five
officers three analysts and four clerk
stenographers attempts were made to
enlarge the section by acquiring more
airmen but the AAF itself had an urgent
need for personnel to fill its numerous
vacancies and made a counteroffer for
the removal of G twos air section to the
Intelligence Division of OCAC where it
would operate on behalf of g2 of course
the offer was declined and the extension
of air intelligence activities in the
mid-1400s of mi d also impeded
operations in this sphere quote in an
early effort to clarify one phase of the
jurisdictional problem relating to
intelligence dissemination the War
Department on 15th of November 1939
formally stated the functions of the mi
d
no objection to publication in service
journals reproduction and redistribution
of g2 reports by arms and services
required the consent of the assistant
chief of staff G to each document
permitted to be reproduced
also had to contain a statement of
sources and its classification could not
be lower than the original document for
the Air Corps such a policy meant that
g2 information could be circulated but
not reproduced even for dissemination to
the limited number of Air Corps
headquarters agencies hence intelligence
was sometimes stale by the time it was
circulated to an interested user
purity not economy was the basis for
limiting distribution the mid-16th
but the necessity for securing g2s
approval before reproducing and
distributing each intelligence report
emanating from his office hampered the
air cores efforts to keep pace with
aviation developments arising from the
experiences in the European war
consequently general Arnold secured
blanket authority on 1st of March 1940
to reproduce and disseminate one or two
copies of g2 materials to major
operating air corps agencies but they
were prohibited from making additional
copies g2 thought the exception granted
Arnold was justified so long as Europe
was at war and while the Air Corps was
engaged in an expansion program shortly
thereafter reproduction restrictions
were further modified by g2 permission
to the OCAC to make as many as five
copies of any confidential or restricted
MiG document end quote
still the intelligence dissemination
problems continued in spite of g2 s
reluctant grants of approval for
increased copy distribution within the
Air Corps in an effort to further
ameliorate intelligence dissemination
difficulties a conference of OCAC
intelligence representatives and mi d
personnel was held in the spring of 1941
among the various views expressed at
this meeting quote Brigadier General
Sherman miles acting AC s g2 was
especially fearful that if the CAC were
to determine what mi D intelligence
should be disseminated to his units then
it would be possible for the Air Corps
to authorize the reproduction of
verbatim secret reports from military
attache z' or executive departments of
the government from strategic studies
required in war planning and from papers
prepared in compliance with specific
requests of the War Department and other
government agencies although the air
armed would have been limited in its
reproduction and redistribution by
regulations on safeguarding military
information protecting the source of
information and limiting distribution to
those with a need-to-know basis general
miles refused to permit any exceptions
to existing rules moreover he advised
intelligence agencies under control of
the chief of the Army Air Forces to
confine their dissemination of
information to the Air Force's generally
to tactical and technical matters
directly affecting the air forces and
that no dissemination be made by those
agencies without the consent of this
division of any secret or confidential
information regarding the present
disposition strength or effectiveness of
foreign forces ground or air such a
restriction along with the others
requiring approval of g2 prior to
reproducing and disseminating
intelligence hampered air intelligence
operations not only at the AAF
headquarters level but also down to and
including the commands a to Air Force
intelligence obviously knew the
intelligence needs of air units better
than an outside agency and he continued
his efforts to secure exemptions from
the same prohibition placed upon him by
the WD GS but freedom for the AAF to
reproduce and redistribute g2 material
did not come until Independence Day in
1942 when the chief of the military
intelligence service mi D
the commanding generals of the AAF and
the air commands to reproduce and
distribute to lower echelon any and all
classified military information received
from g2 unless the document contained a
specific prohibition against
reproduction formal War Department
approval of g2 s action came the
following month end quote still the
major jurisdictional question the
rivalry for control over air
intelligence between g2 and a2 persisted
seeing no other course of action open to
him on the matter Arnold with AAF
intelligence needs continuing to mount
placed the issue before the Chief of
Staff General George C Marshall and
asked for a command decision on his
recommendation for the removal of all
restrictions thought to limit the
reliability and efficiency of air
intelligence operations on September
10th 1941 Arnold had his decision the
War Department supported g2 s position
for continuing the unity of strategic
intelligence responsibilities saying
quote the responsibility imposed on the
Military Intelligence Division W DG s
for the collection evaluation and
dissemination of military information
includes that which pertains to the Army
Air Forces as well as to other arms and
carrying out this responsibility the
Military Intelligence Division is
charged with the compilation of all
information for the purposes of
formulation of comprehensive military
studies and estimates it will prepare
those studies and estimates intelligence
agencies of the chief of the Army Air
Forces will be maintained for the
purpose of the compilation and
evaluation of technical and tactical
information received from the Military
Intelligence Division and other sources
plus the collection of technical air
information from sources abroad through
cooperation with the mid-40s
for such operations as they may be
directed to perform end quote in fact
however the decision was not as
devastating to Air Force intelligence
objectives as might be presumed as
general Arnold stated we are getting
what we want and that we will simply try
out the whole scheme end quote this
cryptic remark meant that a quiet and
amicable settlement between g2 and a2
had been reached as recorded in the
minutes of an air staff meeting on 11th
of September 1941 quote general Scanlon
stated that g2 had agreed to practically
everything we had asked for much of it
will not be written but his understood
permits us to obtain information
ourselves but first we must check
through g2 to determine if they have the
information desired if not then our
personnel can be assigned to obtain it
personnel so assigned will work through
g2s organizations in regard to studies
g2 has been working on reports received
from their sources arrangements have
been made that g2 will furnish us the
complete report and we will make our own
study we are authorized to contact
direct foreign military attachs on duty
in this country and other government
departments end quote
during this particular period of
conflict with g2 over air intelligence
jurisdiction the Air Corps of course
continued to undergo expansion
administrative adjustment and
reorganization during the autumn of 1940
general Arnold began making some changes
including the read designation of the
information division as the Intelligence
Division effective December 1st 1940 no
components added to the unit included a
domestic intelligence
counterintelligence section and an
evaluation section continued or the
administrative foreign intelligence
press relations and maps sections the
library and photographic sections were
transferred to a miscellaneous division
quote prior to the creation of a
counterintelligence or domestic
intelligence section the functions
assigned to it including the collection
and dissemination of information
concerning espionage sabotage subversion
disloyalty and disaffection had been
performed by the information divisions
intelligence section by January 1940 a
separate counterintelligence branch had
been established but for many months no
officer was available to head it and the
work was supervised by the chief of
intelligence section major jg taylor by
the time of the air core reorganization
in december the volume of
counterintelligence operations had
mounted to a
point warranting the establishment of a
domestic intelligence section with a
force of two officers and three enlisted
men as one of the principal components
of the Intelligence Division the
establishment of an evaluation section
grew out of the suggestion made to
general Arnold on 23rd of October 1940
by Colonel George East Rada Meyer acting
chief plans division OCAC
noting the vast amount of intelligence
material flowing into the OCAC
and then being reproduced and
distributed without being digested
Colonel Strada Meyer recommended the
creation of an evaluation unit in the
information division not only to
summarize and analyze the material for
busy commanders and staff personnel but
to dig out lessons indicating necessary
policy changes and new projects
requiring attention the then-current
system for evaluating information and
securing the necessary action was in the
hands of the air corps board at Maxwell
Field Alabama within personel
limitations the board had been
evaluating and studying wartime lessons
in order to prepare and revise air
tactical doctrine and to provide
educational and training material for
combat personnel with the establishment
of an evaluation section the board was
to continue its past functions but in
its evaluation of War Information it was
to report any foreign development and
trends which might become apparent
it was the evaluation section however
which was given the primary
responsibility for detecting foreign
developments and trends for summarizing
all pertinent foreign intelligence
appearing in periodic air bulletins end
quote because of the hostilities in
Europe the foreign intelligence section
was the largest and fastest-growing unit
within the Intelligence Division it
consisted of a current intelligence
branch a foreign liaison branch and an
Operations planning branch while the
first of these components was
responsible for processing information
pertaining to current military
developments quote
very little actual collection other than
from such open sources as the New York
Times was involved because the military
intelligence division was supposed to do
all the collecting and then to forward
to the OCAC
whatever concerned air intelligence end
quote
quote the operations planning branch of
the foreign intelligence section created
as the result of an executive directive
issued in December 1939 had developed
into a significant element of the Air
Corps which was emphasizing strategic
offensive operations against enemy
airpower and enemy national structures
the branch had been initially designated
the Air Force intelligence branch of the
information divisions intelligence
section and it brought to that section
some specific duties and planning
functions never before assigned to the
Air Corps in general operations planning
intelligence fell into two categories
first to provide the C AC with air
intelligence upon which he could base
air estimates for various war plans
secondly to compile air intelligence
upon which to conduct initial air
operations under each established war
plan specifically the duties included
such functions as analyzing foreign
national structures to determine their
vulnerability to air attack preparing
objective folders of specific targets in
connection with war plans maintaining
current data on the strengths
organization and equipment of foreign
air forces including detailed technical
data on performance and construction of
foreign airplanes keeping a complete
file of airports and flying facilities
throughout the world and preparing air
route guides for the movement of air
units to potential theaters of operation
at the time of the OCA seas
reorganization in December of 1940 the
operations planning branch was manned by
five officers and ten civilians under
captain HS hansel end quote
in April 1941 and as a consequence of a
formal study conducted by the plans
division of the
operations and functions of the office
of the chief of the Air Corps a special
assignment unit was established in the
public relations section of the
Intelligence Division
and the name of the foreign liaison
branch became the air corps liaison unit
further changes were evident in the air
arm in August with three sections within
the Intelligence Division being renamed
the domestic intelligence section again
became the counterintelligence unit the
Foreign Intelligence section was
retitled the air Intelligence section
and a foreign liaison section was
created from the renamed Air Corps
liaison unit previously located within
the old Foreign Intelligence section by
the summer of 1941 the Intelligence
Division consisted of 54 officers and
127 civilians if air intelligence
personnel were able to hurdle the
stumbling blocks imposed by mounting
organizational charts and changes and
time-consuming preparations of budget
requests and justifications for money
and personnel they were confronted with
jurisdictional obstacles the delineation
of intelligence responsibilities between
the air arm and the mid-1
when the Army Air Force AAF was created
On June 20th 1941 the problem of
clarifying responsibilities of the Air
Arm became an internal one as well as an
external one the AAF had been created to
substitute unity for coordination of
command thus making it superior to both
the Air Corps which was the service
element headed by a major-general george
h brett and the air force combat command
a FCC formerly the GHQ Air Force which
was the combat element headed by
Lieutenant General de los ciemins
general Arnold had the responsibility
for establishing policies and plans for
all army aviation activities and the
chief of staff WD GS was the person to
whom he was accountable
Arnold also retained his position as
deputy chief of staff Ferrer and thus in
his two positions he was able to pass on
air matters brought up by the members of
the WD GS as well as the commanding
generals of the AAF s main components to
assist the chief of the AAF and the
formulation of policies an air staff was
established by using as its core the OCA
C's plans division which had been
organized into sections corresponding to
the divisions of the WD GS the air
sections were renamed a1 a2 a3 a4 and
AWP D air war plans division
thus by lifting the plans division out
of the Air Corps the chief of the AAF
had a ready-made air staff all papers
studies memoranda etc pertaining to
purely air matters which hitherto had
been processed by the WD GS were to be
prepared for final war department action
by the chief of the AAF the exceptions
were those papers pertaining to the
military intelligence and war plans
divisions of the WD GS the air staff was
to assume the air planning functions
formerly performed by the WD GS its
operating functions were confined to the
preparation of policies and instructions
essential to directing and coordinating
the activities of the two major AAF
elements thus in theory the air staff
was the policy agency with the Air Corps
and the combat command performing
operating functions
end quote however because the
relationships between the AAF and the
War Department or not clearly defined
old difficulties between the Air Arm and
the General Staff continued in many
instances in addition friction developed
between the AAF headquarters and the
office of the chief of the Air Corps
which had been the principal
administrative unit of the Air Arm
between June of 1941 and March of 1942
various activities were withdrawn from
OCAC and relocated with the air staff
but with a view to maintaining separate
operating and policymaking entities
quote the strained relationship between
the air staffs of the AAF and the OSI AC
could not endure for long the crisis
created by the Pearl Harbor attack
together with the subsequent prohibition
imposed by the OCAC against informal
communication between its divisions and
the air staff undoubtedly accelerated
the transfer of operating activities out
of the OCA sea not until the elimination
of that office by the War Department
reorganization of March 1942 was air
intelligence planning and operating
completely consolidated into one office
that of the Assistant Chief of Air Staff
a to end quote until the collapse of
France in June 1940 air intelligence
liaison with Great Britain was cautious
formal and conducted with the customary
restrictions on the release of
classified information as German armies
over ran Denmark Norway Belgium and the
Netherlands traditional military and
naval attache contacts were the conduits
for the exchange of intelligence
information between the United States
and embattled England then came the fall
of the fifth French Republic quote all
that seemed to stand between Hitler and
American security was Great Britain thus
alarming condition erased all pretenses
at observing neutrality the new American
policy became assistance to the
democracies by all methods short of war
obviously realizing that knowledge is
power especially in warfare President
Roosevelt approved in July a British
proposal for the interchange of
scientific data in a swift follow-up the
British dispatched to Washington a
commission of technical experts headed
by Sir Henry Tizard scientific adviser
to the Ministry of aircraft production
the mission was authorized to exchange
secret data on such things as radar fire
control turrets rockets explosives
communications etc which items obviously
interested the American military
services initially the British as they
expected gave more scientific
information than they received but the
general result of the conversations of
the Tizard mission with representatives
of the American armed services and the
newly created American National Defense
Research Committee in DRC was a great
stimulus to research on new weapons on
both sides of the Atlantic end quote
by January 1941 after some British
hesitation on the idea an NDRC office
was opened in London and during that
month the United States gave the British
the means for deciphering the Japanese
code quote the policy of close
collaboration afforded a broad base for
the exchange of general military
information as well as scientific early
in August 1940 about the time Hitler
began his air blitzkrieg on the island
kingdom the British and American
governments had agreed secretly for a
full exchange of military information
the mid-1840s --ts for military
information from abroad to be
specifically worded and routed through
g2 channels but G to do and Mail
requests to England did not always
secure the information desired
especially on technical matters it was
found extremely difficult to phrase
specific questions even for technical
personnel when there was very little
data upon which to base precise queries
sending officers to England was
considered by g2 and the chief of the
Air Corps Intelligence Division as the
best means for gaining information which
was not readily available through
anti-shake channels or not at the
disposal of the Tizard mission or other
British delegations sent to the United
States end quote
thus
a bevy of Air Corps officers were
dispatched to Great Britain during 1940
and 41 as individual air observers and
supplement to the regular military
anti-phase when in March of 1941 joint
anglo-american war plans were perfected
called ABC 1 they provided for the
creation of special observer groups of
American officers to ostensibly function
as neutral observers but to also prepare
for conversion into an advance staff
element for a theater of operations
should the United States enter the war
quote under ABC 1 the SPO B s special
observation groups was to become the
official care of the United States Army
forces in the British Isles which later
actually became the European theater of
operations SPO B s's air staff section
eventually evolved into the air
technical section eto headquarters and
then redesignate 'add Directorate of
technical services of the air service
command the United States Army Air
Forces in Europe with the functions of
providing for the inspection and
evaluation of captured enemy aircraft
and directing the activities of air
intelligence field teams the entire SPO
BS groups were civilian clothes and to
the casual observer it would seem that
the American Embassy was expanding its
staff each officer in SPO BS had
contacts with a section of the British
Army or Royal Air Force which
corresponded most nearly to his own
Lieutenant Colonel Homer case SPO BS g2
for example conferred with the British
Ministry on methods of training photo
interpreters and then he recommended
that American personnel be permitted to
take advantage of the RAF photo
interpretation school and units compared
to British developments in that field
the United States was in the elementary
stages also while getting acquainted
with British operations and making war
plans the SP OBS provided the War
Department with a listening post which
relate intelligence concerning the
world's war
fronts end quote meanwhile on the
homefront efforts continued at easing
the way for the exchange of technical
data with the British quote in the
interests of economy efficiency and
simplicity for all arms and services the
Secretary of War designated the ACS g2
to coordinate the exchange of
information with British representatives
in America in matters of aeronautical
equipment and technical information the
air core in the fall of 1940 was
authorized by g2 to divulge data to
authorized representatives of the
British Empire on unclassified
restricted or confidential information
but secret documents which could not be
reclassified to a less restricted
category had to be cleared by g2 prior
to release requests for information from
the British air and purchasing
commissions in America
normally were made through the foreign
liaison branch of the Intelligence
Division OCAC
directed negotiations by the Air Corps
with the British representatives were
permitted for the interchange of
technical information with the
understanding that g2 would be advised
in the form of receipt copies of
information secured and released end
quote
on another matter when the Air Corps in
May 1941 indicated a desire to establish
a branch intelligence office in New York
it was repulsed by the assistant chief
of staff g2 on the basis that such a
request infringed upon his exclusive
responsibility for collecting
intelligence information and would
duplicate an EM ID effort as that agency
already maintained a field facility in
New York since mi d
in the branch office an OSI AC
Intelligence Division analyst was loaned
for this purpose quote by first of
August 1941 the branch offices new
project of producing target folder for
the Air Corps was in progress the
original folder program involving single
targets was extended to cover
increasingly large areas until the air
course
analyze and numbered the various theater
areas from then on area target folders
were produced air target materials were
collected from files of trade data
records of financial transactions
Engineering reports travel Diaries field
notes of scientists and other similar
items existing in the New York area this
material could not be shipped to
Washington for processing and had to be
examined at the sources fortunately the
New York office was located contiguous
to and worked closely with the army map
service thus enabling the office to
produce a bonus in the form of
topographical and geographical
intelligence the mi d2 and its branch in
new york so as to increase the
production of objective folders but in
light of the current international
situation and the great magnitude of the
tasks involved in ferreting out
available data existing within the
United States general Scanlon on the day
before Pearl Harbor told g2 that the
proposal was modest in the extreme the
outbreak of war of course became the
signal for accelerating all expansion
plans into high gear and the branch
office for example was gradually
assigned sufficient personnel to enable
it to provide essential intelligence for
a2s targeting operations for German and
Japanese areas but it was the San
Francisco branch which concentrated on
collecting available intelligence
information on Japanese industries then
came the debacle of Pearl Harbor
December 7th 1941 a - was a madhouse
recalled one of the first officers
assigned to air Intelligence in AAF
headquarters after Pearl Harbor day
sitting at a desk cluttered with ringing
telephones connecting important air
installations the intelligence officer
who valiantly attempted to handle the
large number of incoming calls during
the hectic first days of war reminded an
observer of an old-fashioned movie in
those days a newly assigned officer
would see read upon entering an office
of a - with every
increasing demands for intelligence
desks in a crowded small room were
frequently piled high with documents and
as almost everything was classified the
prevailing read security cover sheets
seemed to lend a reddish hue to the room
a new officer could see read both
literally and figuratively
in one instance for example an officer
was rushed from his pistol patrol of
bowling field Washington DC to a - only
to wait days before someone could find
time to assign him specific duties even
then the young and inexperienced
intelligence officer had to use his own
judgment and imagination as to how his
tasks should be accomplished end quote
efforts were soon made to restore order
to military operations in the aftermath
of the Japanese attack the only truly
functional air intelligence entity was
the Air Corps Intelligence Division and
it was quickly sought by a - in a
centralized intelligence plan quote
after a period of negotiations the views
of the higher headquarters finally
prevailed and the chief of the air staff
on 23rd January 1942 directed the chief
of the Air Corps to transfer to a - all
the functions personnel and equipment of
the foreign liaison section and the air
intelligence section the latter was the
heart and soul of the air Intelligence
Division because it was composed of the
current unit containing the file of
technical intelligence collected over a
period of years the evaluation unit
charged with correlating and evaluating
intelligence and the operations unit
which translated intelligence into air
estimate and target objectives
a small number of officers and civilians
of the air intelligence section were
permitted to remain in the Intelligence
Division so as to allow the CAC to
continue his command functions and
responsibilities the sections remaining
in the Intelligence Division were Maps
counterintelligence and air intelligence
school furthermore copies of all
intelligence matters received by a2 were
to be sent to the OCAC a sufficient
amount of air Intelligence functions
remained in the OCAC
to prevent the attainment of the goal of
centralization of intelligence Authority
further complications and duplications
resulted from the operations of an air
Intelligence office in the military
intelligence division of the WD GS end
quote
the importance of the Air Arm and the
prosecution of the war soon became
evident and accordingly quote the War
Department through circular 59 issued on
2nd of March 1942 and effective on 9th
of March decided that the most effective
organization which would give the
desired freedom of action for all
services and at the same time ensure the
necessary unity of command was one
having three autonomous and coordinate
commands under the chief of staff army
ground forces Army Air Forces and the
services of supply later renamed army
service forces the overall planning
coordinating and supervisory role of the
WD GS was reaffirmed but enough air
officers were to be assigned to the War
Department to help make strategic
decisions the goal of 50% air officers
on duty with the WD GS was never reached
principally because qualified Air Corps
officers were so scarce
thus g2 was not only able to enlarge his
air unit but he was reassured of this
responsibility for collecting all
intelligence both air and ground
nevertheless the reorganized office of
a2 was to make the most of the grant of
autonomy to the AAF as the result of the
reorganization of March 1942 the
intelligence functions
the OCAC and combat command were
transferred to a two headed by Colonel
RL Walsh who had replaced general
Scanlon on 21st of February 1942 a 2
however lost the activities and
personnel of its foreign liaison section
to G twos newly established Military
Intelligence Service M is about the same
time the intelligence service is the air
Intelligence operating agency comparable
to the NIS was established under the
supervision and control of a to the
first director of the is lieutenant
colonel C II Henry was assigned the
functions of collecting evaluating and
disseminating technical and other types
of intelligence training air
intelligence officers and operating the
security services to accomplish these
duties the administrative operational
informational intelligence lest the
current unit and the counterintelligence
sections were transferred from the a2
division to the is the administrative
section served both the is and a2 with
the is as the major operating agency the
other sections under a 2 were executive
and staff combat intelligence and
current intelligence a plans section was
also established in a to for the
purposes of formulating plans for
collecting and disseminating air
intelligence training intelligence
officers establishing air intelligence
requirements coordinating projects with
the air staff and the WD GS divisions
and establishing liaison with other
American and foreign intelligence
agencies the section was short-lived as
a separate entity as a result of a 2 s
order for its absorption into the
executive and staff section
end quote three months after the March
reorganization took place a formal
survey was conducted to deal with
weaknesses in the new arrangements a two
had little criticism of the scheme
except for a clearer relationship
between the counterintelligence groups
of the
wdg s and those of the air intelligence
service quote slight changes were made
and in a few instances some offices were
reshift 'add in a to an office of
technical information with a nucleus of
four officers transferred from the
public relations branch was created as a
part of the current intelligence section
colonel EP Sorensen who had assumed the
position of a CAS a two on 22nd of June
1942 used the newly acquired office to
prepare the weekly brief for general
Arnold's use in the meetings of the war
council by the beginning of the
following year the office of technical
information had become an independent
section in a 2 s office in addition to
preparing weekly summary reports for
general Arnold the office also handled
the AAF spoke relations activities and
helped prepare for publication the
office service journal Air Force which
on 6th of September superseded the Air
Force newsletter other newly established
units included an intelligence training
unit within the air intelligence service
by early 1943 training functions had
been incorporated into a training
coordinating section and transferred
from the AIS to the a2 level
the Special Projects section in the AIS
was also moved to a to where it was
eventually incorporated into the staff
advisors section in general the main
divisions in the office of the a CAS a
to remained fairly well stabilized from
the time of the War Department
reorganization of March 1942 until the
AAF streamlined its own structure in the
following March by abolishing the
directorates end quote this was the last
major reorganization of the air arms
intelligence structure during the period
of the war quote after an adjustment and
reconciliation of the various plans and
ideas that had been presented during the
previous months a streamlined
organization went into effect on 29th of
March 1943 many offices do
to the planning or execution of specific
functions were telescoped into the
offices of assistant chiefs of staff and
special staff in the office of the
assistant Chief of Air Staff
intelligence all the functions assigned
to air intelligence were divided among
five principal divisions operational
intelligence counterintelligence
intelligence information historical and
combat liaison and training the
last-named
divisions combined the combat liaison
section of the air intelligence service
and the training coordination section
which had been on the a2 staff level the
current intelligence section was also
removed from his a2 staff status and
made part of the informational
Intelligence Division the only units
left out of the five main divisions
because of their service to the entire
intelligence office were the office
Services office of technical information
to handle public relations and special
projects formerly staff advisors two
sections of counterintelligence
safeguarding of military information and
training clearance were transferred to
the facility's security and personnel
security branches in the air provost
marshal's division and a cas materiel
maintenance and distribution by june
1943 the combat liaison and training
division became the training plans
division and given the functions of
making studies in and formulating
policies and practices for intelligence
training in AAF schools and units at
about the same time the operational
intelligence and intelligence
information divisions were renamed
operational and informational divisions
respectively by October 1943 a few minor
changes had been made within the
divisions and two new agencies were
added the air intelligence school
section was created to operate the air
intelligence school at Harrisburg
Pennsylvania for the training of AAF
officers and combat and base
intelligence photo interpretation and
prisoner of war interrogation end quote
while certain post-war changes would be
affected in the air intelligence
institution immediately after the
cessation of hostilities in 1945 the
next significant restructuring of this
intelligence organization would occur
with the establishment of the
independent United States Air Force in
1947 this is our hidden history
you